:title:     OSCON 2014 Trip Report, part 1
:date:      2014-07-31
:slug:      oscon-2014-p1
:author:    Eric Gustafson
:tags:      OSCON, trip report

This year's OSCON_ was my first attendance of the conference; I was pleasantly
surprised.  The conference is 5 days, the first two of which are half day
tutorial sessions, and the remaining 3 being the core conference.  I attended
the 3 core days of the conference, and my brain was completely overflowed by the
end.

.. _OSCON: http://www.oscon.com/oscon2014

In this post, part 1 of 2, the interesting items of note in the Keynote
presentations are discussed.  A follow on post will catalog the main sessions I
attended. 

Keynotes
========

Each morning OSCON has an hour's worth of 5-15 keynote presentations -- a format
I hadn't seen, but like.  High density and thought provoking, each keynote is
recorded and available for every one to view.  The following are my picks for
most intriguing, (in no particular order).


- `Building an API for the Planet with a new Approach to Satellites 
  <http://www.oscon.com/oscon2014/public/schedule/detail/36202>`_

  The folks at `Planet Labs <https://www.planet.com/>`_ are building bird sized,
  (raptor sized) satellites and deploying them in a polar orbit to create the
  worlds first "planet scanner".  A goal being to image the entire planet, every
  day, as the earth rotates beneath the ring of satellites.  And, ... there's
  more - this was OSCON: make the image data available to the public.

- `Anticipating the Future - an Introduction to Value Chain Mapping
  <http://www.oscon.com/oscon2014/public/schedule/detail/35743>`_ 

  Simon successfully argues that the "lemming" strategy of how to be successful
  in business endeavors is not necessarily the most effective.  In lieu of
  following the leader, he argues and then exemplifies a analytic, (and
  scientific), approach to determining what actions would likely be more
  successful for a business -- through the life cycle of a business.

- `The Concert Programmer
  <http://www.oscon.com/oscon2014/public/schedule/detail/36818>`_

  Entertaining, and certainly intriguing, Andrew Sorensen does actually perform
  a live concert by programming the music live.  In this 10 minute performance
  Andrew explains the coding he performs while code-performing his musical
  piece.

- `Yes, Your Refrigerator Is Trying To Kill You: Bad Actors and the Internet of
  Things <http://www.oscon.com/oscon2014/public/schedule/detail/36257>`_

  Yes, security updates to intelligent appliances do matter; no, they are not
  happening.  Beth Flanagan does an excellent job of relaying the increasing
  hazards lacking security in the Internet of Things could present to all humans
  on the planet.


Coming in part two:  my notes on the sessions I attended.

.. Local Variables:
.. fill-column: 80
.. End:
