:title: Monitorama 2015
:date: 2015-06-22
:slug: monitorama-2015
:author: Eric Gustafson
:tags: Monitorama, trip report, monitoring

This year's Monitorama_ was another success for `@obfuscurity`_ and the
monitoring community.  My one line observation of this years event is that the
event was "less pragmatic" than last year.  I would rate the more abstract
qualities of quality, diversity, and my overall desire to attend the same as
last year -- high.  My personal preference for this, and most, conferences is
pragmatism and so I call this out; my ranking of presentations certainly
reflects this, more so than any general vote of quality.

.. _Monitorama:  http://monitorama.com/
.. _@obfuscurity:  https://twitter.com/obfuscurity

:Monitorama 2015 video:  https://vimeo.com/channels/933981

----

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
.. section-numbering::
   :depth: 2

Without further ado, my ranked recommendations for Monitorama 2015 review:

Must Watch
==========

Working with Riemann
--------------------

:Speaker: `Kyle Kingsbury <https://github.com/aphyr>`_ -- creator of Riemann
:Video:   https://vimeo.com/131385889

Kyle provides a good overview of Riemann, his "part time project".  While not an
in depth discussion of Riemann, Kyle does a good job of covering the core
concepts and breadth of what Riemann can accomplish.  An excellent source if one
is trying to discover if and where Riemann can be utilized.

The Dark Art of Container Monitoring
------------------------------------

:Speaker: `Loris Degioanni <https://github.com/ldegio>`_
:Company: `sysdig <http://www.sysdig.org/>`_ (GitHub <https://github.com/draios>)-- creator & CEO
:Video:   https://vimeo.com/131495389
:Slides:  http://www.slideshare.net/LorisDegioanni/monitorama-slides

Loris demonstrated container monitoring with his relatively new tool sysdig_
and cAdvisor_ from Google.  This is an excellent overview and demo of both
tools.  Additionally, Loris demos a commercial product that takes sysdig_ to the
next level, providing a web based dashboard of an entire running cluster --
`sysdig cloud`_.

.. _sysdig: http://www.sysdig.org/
.. _cAdvisor: https://github.com/google/cadvisor
.. _`sysdig cloud`: https://sysdig.com/


Heka (workshop)
---------------

:Speaker:      `Rob Miller <https://github.com/rafrombrc>`_
:Representing: `Mozilla Heka <https://hekad.readthedocs.org/en/v0.9.2/>`_
               (GitHub <https://github.com/mozilla-services/heka>)
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131581322
:Slides:       http://www.slideshare.net/devopsdays/heka-rob-miller (alternate deck)

Rob presents an architectural overview of the Heka stream processing engine.  He
discusses some of its many use-cases.  This presentation will convey to the
viewer enough to determine if Heka is appropriate for potential tasks.
               
Insightful
==========

If you make it past the first three "Must Watch" presentations then the
following are where I would recommend spending your time next.  The first two
are less pragmatic, but cover lessons learned and potentially positive ways of
looking at monitoring issues as learned from Netflix.  The Last is an good
overview and introduction to Druid.

Operational Insight
-------------------

:Speaker:      Roy Rapoport
:Representing: Netflix
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131377936

Monitoring Netflix Content Delivery Network
-------------------------------------------

:Speaker:      Sergey Fedorov
:Representing: Netflix
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131495390

Druid (workshop)
----------------

:Speaker:      `Gian Merlino <https://github.com/gianm>`_
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131581328
:Slides:       https://speakerdeck.com/gianm/druid-at-monitorama-2015  (GitHub
               companion <https://github.com/gianm/druid-monitorama-2015>)

Intriguing
==========

To continue exploring the Monitorama 2015, the presentations below were my pick
of other 'above the median' (not everyone can be above 50%, only half of us),
presentations; if you like my choices so far, hopefully these will also be
intriguing to you.

Practical & Robust Anomaly Detection
------------------------------------

:Speaker:      Arun Kejeriwal
:Representing: Twitter
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131390946

Stream Processing inside Librato
--------------------------------

:Speaker:      Dave Josephen
:Representing: Librato
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131502992


A People's History of Microservices
-----------------------------------

:Speaker:      Camille Fournier
:Representing: Rent the Runway
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131377935

Bosun (workshop)
----------------

:Speaker:      Kyle Brant
:Representing: Stack Overflow
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131581326


The Evolution of Monitoring Systems at Google
---------------------------------------------

:Speaker:      Tony Rippy
:Representing: Google - Production Monitoring SRE
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131484321

Netflix Instance Performance Analysis Requirements
--------------------------------------------------

:Speaker:      Brendan Gregg
:Representing: Netflix
:Video:        https://vimeo.com/131484323

Honorable Mention
=================

There was one presentation that was less general, but for the audience where
it's appropriate, it is certainly worth a watch .. not to mention any names like
"Todd".

Cyanite (workshop)
------------------

:Speaker: Pierre-Yves Ritschard
:Video:   https://vimeo.com/131581325

Cyanite is a merger of Graphite and Cassandra.  For large metric storage it
appears to be a project certainly worth investigating.          


The Origins of Monitorama
-------------------------

Finally, in digging through twitter postings, I discovered that `@obfuscurity`_ has
made a guest contribution to the Librato blog and covers:

:Blog:  `The Origins of Monitorama <http://blog.librato.com/posts/monitorama-origins>`_

\

Thank you Jason.

.. Local Variables:
.. fill-column: 80
.. End:
