:title:     Installing Pelican on Cygwin
:date:      2014-07-29
:slug:      pelican-cygwin
:author:    Eric Gustafson
:tags:      pelican, cygwin, blog

One of the many good reasons I chose Pelican_ as a static blog site
generator was because I felt confident I could deploy and use the
tools under Windows, with Cygwin_.  What I couldn't find was any
reference to success installing Pelican under Cygwin.  It turns out
that the combination is not difficult to make work.  Here is my
success story installing Pelican under Cygwin.

.. _Pelican:  http://blog.getpelican.com/

Prerequisites
=============

- Windows -- hopefully obvious.
- Cygwin_ -- also hopefully obvious
- `Cygwin Ports`_ [1]_
- Cygwin Packages

  - git
  - python
  - python-setuptools

.. _Cygwin: https://www.cygwin.com/
.. _Cygwin Ports: http://cygwinports.org/

.. [1] I consistently add `Cygwin Ports`_ to my Cygwin installation.
       Its possible these instructions work with out adding the ports
       collection in.

Procedure
=========

Installing Pelican_ under Cygwin_ ended up being fairly straight
forward.  I encountered one small problem: some of Pelican's
dependencies would not install from source.  This is easily
circumvented by using the equivalent Cygwin_ packages.  With out
further ado.

1. Install `Pelican Dependencies`_ from Cygwin
----------------------------------------------

.. _Pelican Dependencies: http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.4.0/install.html#dependencies

Start Cygwin's ``setup-x86.exe`` [2]_ to update your installation.
Install the following packages, if not already present.

  - pypy-jinja2
  - pypy-pygments
  - python-docutils
  - python-pytz
  - python-six
  - pypy-markupsafe
  - pypy-dateutil

2. Complete using the command line
----------------------------------

Start a cygwin terminal window and use command line tools to complete
the installation.  If you do not already have ``pip``
<http://pip.readthedocs.org/> installed, use ``easy_install``, from
``python-setuptools`` to install ``pip``.

.. code-block:: bash

   > easy_install pip
   ...
   > pip install "git+https://github.com/getpelican/pelican.git#egg-pelican"
   ...
   # ... a lot of output as the recursive dependencies are resolved ...
   # expect warnings, but a final notice saying pelican was successfully
   # installed along with additional, dependent packages.
   ...
   > pelican --help
   ...
   # output consistent with the help from pelican.

Note:  Pelican can be simply installed with ``pip`` using ``pip
install pelican``.  I chose to pull Pelican from source so I could
stay on their trunk.


Verify
======

It doesn't count if it doesn't work.  The following steps are the smoke
test I ran to convince myself the installation was working reasonably
correct.  

.. code-block:: bash

   > mkdir tmp; cd tmp   # (optional, do what makes sense)
   > pelican-quickstart
   ... 
   # give reasonable answers
   ...
   > pelican content
   ...
   > ./develop_server start
   ...

- point your favorite web browser at http://localhost:8000/ and the
  template site should be visible.

Note: my first instinct was to simply point a browser directly at
the files generated by Pelican in the ``output`` directory; this was
only partially successful.  I observed the rendered HTML, but no
styling; it threw me off for a minute, 

So far I have not encountered any problems; using
Windows/Cygwin is always a small adventure for \*nix native projects,
so I'm ... cautiously optimistic.


.. [2] <https://www.cygwin.com/install.html>

.. LocalWords:  Cygwin cygwin Gustafson pypy
