:title: IPv6 Network (Auto) Configuration
:date: 2015-03-06
:slug: ipv6-dhcpv6
:author: Eric Gustafson
:tags: IPv6, FreeBSD, Linux, DHCP, DNS, dnsmasq
:status: draft

In my previous article, `IPv6 Tunneling over IPv6 Networks`_, I discussed how to
connect a LAN to the IPv6 public Internet.  This article continues the theme,
discussing the issues surrounding the configuration of the LAN for IPv6.

.. _`IPv6 Tunneling over IPv6 Networks`: {filename}2015-02-25-ipv6-tunneling.rst

Looking at how IPv4 LAN's are configured proves to be instructive.  Many of the
techniques, and all of the patterns turn out to have parallels in IPv6.  During
the design of IPv6 there was opportunity for some refactoring from lessons
learned in IPv4.  Initial host configuration was an area that received some
attention, and so, we will explore the new methods provided by IPv6 as well as
the traditional techniques carried forward from IPv4.

Network Autoconfiguration
=========================

The goal here is to identify how hosts joining an IPv6 network can come to
discover and then interoperate on that network.  The network *may* also have
IPv4, but it should not be required.  Specifically, the goal is to show how
hosts can, as automatically as possible, configure themselves on an **IPv6
only** network.  The same (pre)configuration should also work if the network
happens to support IPv4, and the hosts should then configure and join the IPv4
network as well.

There are two use cases that are used to vet the proposed methods.  The first is
the "small lab" use case.  Think of a small, less than 100 hosts, lab
environment, or SOHO office.  In this sort of environment some of the hosts are
very dynamic, and some are more static with specific functions assigned to them;
for instance, a mail, or IRC server.  The second use case is the prototype
environment for a distributed application.  Often such environments are created
with VM's using tools such as Vagrant_ inside a developer's laptop.  The
"environment" can be paused and restarted, it can be relocated, and the hosts
are often destroyed and recreated for a "fresh install".  In both cases, formal
rigor in configuring and maintaining the network are not as important as a
degree of automation combined with flexibility to manually adjust things when
necessary.

.. _Vagrant: https://www.vagrantup.com/

In an IPv4 world, DHCP_ combined with DNS_ are the go-to tools for such
configuration.  As luck has it, both are available in the IPv6 world as
well. DNS remains unchanged, except for the addition of the AAAA_ record that
holds IPv6 addresses; AAAA records are retrievable via IPv4 as well.  DHCP
functions the same, but the specifics are adapted for IPv6 and to disambiguate,
is known as DHCPv6_; there is a separate RFC, RFC-3315_.

.. _DHCP: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_Host_Configuration_Protocol
.. _DNS: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_Name_System
.. _AAAA: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6_address#IPv6_addresses_in_the_Domain_Name_System
.. _DHCPv6: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DHCPv6
.. _RFC-3315: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3315

IPv6 Autoconfiguration
----------------------

During the design of IPv6, codenamed 'IPng' at the time, the design of
"autoconfiguration" for IP was refactored to support a more automated method by
which hosts could join an IPv6 network.  In the base IPv4 protocol there is no
explicit support for autoconfiguration.  In IPv6 autoconfiguration support was
initially integrated into ICMPv6_.  This comes in the form of `Neighbor Discovery
Protocol`_ (NDP) and includes the ability for a host to automatically discover:

- Neighbor Discovery and Advertisement, replacing IPv4's ARP_.
- Network address prefix discovery.
- Link (L2) parameter discovery, such as MTU.
- Next-hop determination through Router Solicitation and Advertisement (RA) -
  Routing.
- Duplicate address detection, allowing hosts to generate a host address and
  determine if it is a duplicate.  (If so, they will pick another).

The above tools that made up the original NDP allow a host to perform what is
formally called `Stateless address autoconfiguration`_ (SLAAC).  Additionally,
NDP, through Router Solicitation and Router Advertisement (RA), allows a host
to define itself a unique host address, determine its network address, and
router(s).  This is all the necessary  details a host needs to start sending and
receiving IP packets.  The IPng designers believed they had successfully
refactored the base IP, including ICMP, protocol to handle autoconfiguration.

.. _Neighbor Discovery Protocol: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbor_Discovery_Protocol
.. _ICMPv6: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICMPv6
.. _ARP: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_Resolution_Protocol
.. _Stateless address autoconfiguration: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6#Stateless_address_autoconfiguration_.28SLAAC.29  

The refactoring was not agile enough.  While hosts can configure the IP layer
with SLAAC, it turns out that DHCPv4 is used provide added functionality beyond
simply configuring the IP layer of a host.  The almost universally used feature
of DHCP beyond IP layer is communicating the DNS server's IP address.  SLAAC did
not initially have support for this and thus DHCPv6 was born.  The ICMPv6 Router
Advertisement was extended in RFC-6106_ to allow the inclusion of DNS
configuration information in the RA message.  

.. _RFC-6106: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6106

RFC-6106, which allows DNS details in router advertisements, is not the end of
the story.  Firstly, its adoption has not been slow, and secondly, there remain
additional configuration details not covered by the RFC that are desired when
autoconfiguring hosts on an IP network.  In fact, IANA_ cites well over 150
option parameters registered for DHCP [#]_.

.. _IANA: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Assigned_Numbers_Authority


Stateful and Stateless DHCPv6
-----------------------------

The ability for a host to autoconfigure, through SLAAC, it's IPv6 details gives
rise to a new mode of use for DHCP - "Stateless DHCPv6".  In this mode, the host
first uses SLAAC to configure its IPv6 details and then uses DHCPv6 to request
additional details like DNS, NTP, etc.  In this mode the host indicates it is
operating "stateless" and the server does not perform address assignment.

In addition to the stateless mode, DHCPv6 can also be used in a "stateful" mode
where an IPv6 address is assigned from the server's pool of addresses.  IPv6
allows and most often requires hosts to have multiple IPv6 addresses assigned to
a single interface; the link-local address is an excellent example of this.
Because hosts must support multiple addresses per interface it is possible to
use both SLAAC and stateful DHCPv6 to configure a host.  If both methods are
used then there will be multiple IPv6 addresses assigned to the interface.  The
link-local address is also required, so using both methods will ensure the
interface has at least three addresses.

The late arrival of DNS configuration as part of SLAAC caused some vendors,
Microsoft Windows most notably, to pursue client IPv6 autoconfiguration which
required DHCPv6.  This makes the use of DHCPv6 a near requirement in any network
that has liberal requirements for operating system support.

Host Registration in DNS
------------------------

Providing DNS configuration to an autoconfiguring host does not imply
registering that host in the local DNS tables.  In fact, neither DHCPv4, nor
DHCPv6 address the issue of DNS registration of newly configured hosts.  In many
environments, including the lab, and prototype use case environments,
registering configured hosts ranges from very helpful to required.  Some clients
will perform this task, but this behavior is not common enough to rely on it.

There are a number of different tools to support registering hosts in DNS as
they join a network, but one project is more appealing than the others for our
given use cases:  Dnsmasq_.  The Dnsmasq project combines DHCP and DNS in a
single daemon and supports both IPv4 and IPv6.  Dnsmasq also supports portions
of IPv6 autoconfiguration, including router advertisement (RA).  The feature
that places Dnsmasq in the most appealing position is that its DHCP and DNS
integration includes automatically registering DHCP leases in the DNS tables
when a hostname is provided in the DHCP request; solving exactly the problem not
explicitly addressed in DHCP or DNS specifications.

.. _Dnsmasq: http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/doc.html

Through experimentation it was determined that Windows and Mac OSX based systems
consistently provide the hostname as part of their DHCP request.  Unfortunately,
the most popular, and widely used, DHCP client, from ISC, either does not, or is
rarely configured to send the hostname.  Fortunately, an alternative DHCP client
does: the dhcpcd_ client.  Investigating the dhcpcd client also revealed that
it is trivial to swap the ISC client for dhcpcd on most Linux hosts.

.. _ISC: https://www.isc.org/
.. _dhcpcd: http://roy.marples.name/projects/dhcpcd/index

Router and Client Configuration
===============================

The following is the Dnsmasq_ configuration applied on the router that allows
for the most effective autoconfiguration of IPv6::

  # dnsmasq configuration for router "appliance"
  no-resolv
  server=10.3.7.1

  local=/cloud1/

  domain=cloud1
  dhcp-fqdn

  enable-ra
  dhcp-option=option6:dns-server,[2001:db8:4b:222::1]
  dhcp-option=option6:dns-name,cloud1

  dhcp-range=::100,::1ff,constructor:em1

The configuration is broken down as follows:

:no-resolve: Disable using /etc/resolv.conf as a basis for configuring the
             dnsmasq server.  This was done to make this example clearly
             explicit.

:server=10.3.7.1: Configure the server that dnsmasq forwards all DNS requests it
                  can not handle locally to.  Note that the forwarder does *not*
                  need to be a IPv6 address, although it could be.  Multiple
                  forwarders are configurable if desired.

:local=/cloud1/: Declare the domain "cloud1" as the domain being served locally.

:domain=cloud1: Declare the domain "cloud1" as the domain for all DHCP requests

:dhcp-fqdn: Force all DHCP clients to be placed in the "cloud1" domain,
            regardless of what domain they specify in the DHCP request.

:enable-ra: Perform IPv6 Router Advertisement as part of Dnsmasq's operation.
            Other router advertisement daemons should not be run.  If the host
            Dnsmasq is running on is not the router then disable this.

:dhcp-option...dns-server: Explicitly configure and ensure the ``dns-server``
                           option is sent in the DHCP reply.  The address listed
                           is an address assigned to the 'em1' interface on this
                           host.

:dhcp-option...dns-name: Send 'cloud1' as the assigned domain to all clients
                         performing DHCP requests.

:dhcp-range...: Issue IPv6 addresses between ::100 and ::1ff in response to DHCP
                requests.  The "constructor:em1" directs the configuration to
                use the network prefix of the 'em1' interface as the network
                prefix for the leased addresses.  The actual address returned
                will be [em1 prefix]::[100-1ff].

Enabling the `log-dhcp` or `log-queries` parameters in Dnsmasq will enable
verbose reporting of either DHCP or DNS is debugging is required.

Client DHCP Configuration
-------------------------

No explicit configuration is required on the client side except replacing the
ISC DHCP client with the dhcpcd client.  For Debian derived Linux
installations::

  sudo apt-get remove isc-dhcp-client isc-dhcp-common
  sudo apt-get install dhcpcd5

No configuration files need to be modified.


Conclusion
==========

By utilizing the Dnsmasq_ and dhcpcd_ projects a very simple configuration can
be constructed that supports autoconfiguration of an IPv6 network.  This pattern
can be utilized in both heterogeneous lab like environments as well as prototype
environments, including Vagrant based setups on developer laptops.


References
==========

.. [#] DHCP and BOOTP Parameters: https://www.iana.org/assignments/bootp-dhcp-parameters/bootp-dhcp-parameters.xhtml

----

:DHCPv6:
   - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DHCPv6
   - https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3315
:ICMPv6:
   - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICMPv6
   - https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4443
   - https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6106
:NDP - Neighbor Discovery Protocol:
   - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbor_Discovery_Protocol
:Dnsmasq - DHCP + DNS daemon:
   - http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/doc.html
:dhcpcd - alternative DHCP client:
   - http://roy.marples.name/projects/dhcpcd/index

.. Local Variables:
.. fill-column: 80
.. End:
